Lab 3: Managing Files and Directories via CLI
Objectives
By the end of this lab, you will be able to:

Create, move, copy, and delete files and directories using CLI commands
Explore file metadata using ls -l and stat
Redirect command output using > and >>
Prerequisites
A Linux-based system (e.g., Fedora, Ubuntu, or RHEL)
Terminal access with standard user privileges
Basic familiarity with CLI navigation
Lab Tasks
Task 1: Creating Files and Directories
Subtask 1.1: Create a Directory
Open a terminal.
Use mkdir to create a new directory named lab3_files:
mkdir lab3_files
Verify the directory was created:
ls
Expected Output: lab3_files should appear in the list.
Subtask 1.2: Create a File
Navigate into the lab3_files directory:
cd lab3_files
Use touch to create an empty file named notes.txt:
touch notes.txt
Verify the file was created:
ls
Expected Output: notes.txt should appear in the list.
Task 2: Copying and Moving Files
Subtask 2.1: Copy a File
Create a copy of notes.txt named notes_backup.txt:
cp notes.txt notes_backup.txt
Verify the copy was created:
ls
Expected Output: Both notes.txt and notes_backup.txt should appear.
Subtask 2.2: Move a File
Create a new directory named backup:
mkdir backup
Move notes_backup.txt into the backup directory:
mv notes_backup.txt backup/
Verify the file was moved:
ls backup/
Expected Output: notes_backup.txt should appear inside the backup directory.
Task 3: Exploring File Metadata
Subtask 3.1: List Files with Detailed Information
Use ls -l to view detailed file metadata:
ls -l
Expected Output: Displays permissions, owner, size, and modification time for files.
Subtask 3.2: Use stat for Advanced Metadata
Run stat on notes.txt:
stat notes.txt
Expected Output: Displays inode, access/modify times, and file size in bytes.
Task 4: Redirecting Output
Subtask 4.1: Redirect Output to a File
Redirect the output of ls -l to a file named file_list.txt`:
ls -l > file_list.txt
View the contents of file_list.txt:
cat file_list.txt
Expected Output: The file should contain the same output as ls -l.
Subtask 4.2: Append Output to a File
Append the output of stat notes.txt to file_list.txt:
stat notes.txt >> file_list.txt
Verify the appended content:
cat file_list.txt
Expected Output: The file should now include both ls -l and stat outputs.
Task 5: Deleting Files and Directories
Subtask 5.1: Delete a File
Remove notes.txt:
rm notes.txt
Verify deletion:
ls
Expected Output: notes.txt should no longer appear.
Subtask 5.2: Delete a Directory
Remove the backup directory and its contents:
rm -r backup
Verify deletion:
ls
Expected Output: backup should no longer appear.
Troubleshooting Tips
Permission Denied: Use sudo if you encounter permission issues (e.g., sudo rm -r backup).
File Not Found: Double-check file/directory names and paths.
Accidental Deletion: Be cautious with rm -r—it permanently deletes files.
Conclusion
In this lab, you practiced essential CLI file and directory management tasks, including creation, copying, moving, and deletion. You also explored file metadata and output redirection. These skills are foundational for efficient system administration and development work.

Next Steps: Practice these commands regularly to build muscle memory. Explore additional flags (e.g., ls -a, cp -i) for more advanced usage.

Lab Completion Checklist
✅ Created files and directories
✅ Copied and moved files
✅ Viewed file metadata
✅ Redirected output
✅ Deleted files and directories

