Lab 9: Managing Services with systemd
Objectives
By the end of this lab, you will be able to:

Control and monitor services using systemctl
Check service status, start, stop, and restart services
Enable and disable services at boot
Inspect unit files
View logs with journalctl
Prerequisites
A Linux system with systemd (e.g., RHEL, Fedora, CentOS, or Ubuntu 16.04+)
Root or sudo privileges
Basic familiarity with the command line
Lab Tasks
Task 1: Check Service Status
Objective: Learn how to check the status of a service using systemctl.

Step 1: List All Running Services
Run the following to list all active services:

systemctl list-units --type=service --state=running
Expected Output:
A table showing all running services, their load state, active state, and description.

Step 2: Check Status of a Specific Service
Check the status of the sshd (SSH) service:

systemctl status sshd
Expected Output:
Detailed status including whether the service is active, enabled, and recent log entries.

Troubleshooting Tip:
If sshd is not installed, install it with:

sudo dnf install openssh-server  # For RHEL/Fedora/CentOS
sudo apt install openssh-server  # For Ubuntu/Debian
Task 2: Start, Stop, and Restart Services
Objective: Control services by starting, stopping, and restarting them.

Step 1: Stop a Service
Stop the sshd service:

sudo systemctl stop sshd
Verify it is stopped:

systemctl status sshd
Expected Output:
Active: inactive (dead)

Step 2: Start a Service
Start the sshd service again:

sudo systemctl start sshd
Verify it is running:

systemctl status sshd
Expected Output:
Active: active (running)

Step 3: Restart a Service
Restart the sshd service:

sudo systemctl restart sshd
Expected Output:
The service should briefly stop and then start again.

Task 3: Enable and Disable Services at Boot
Objective: Configure services to start automatically at boot.

Step 1: Enable a Service
Enable sshd to start on boot:

sudo systemctl enable sshd
Expected Output:
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/sshd.service → /usr/lib/systemd/system/sshd.service

Step 2: Disable a Service
Disable sshd from starting on boot:

sudo systemctl disable sshd
Expected Output:
Removed /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/sshd.service

Task 4: Inspect Unit Files
Objective: Examine service configuration files.

Step 1: View the Unit File
Display the sshd unit file:

systemctl cat sshd
Expected Output:
The contents of the sshd.service file.

Step 2: Check Dependencies
List dependencies of the sshd service:

systemctl list-dependencies sshd
Expected Output:
A tree of services that sshd depends on.

Task 5: View Logs with journalctl
Objective: Use journalctl to inspect service logs.

Step 1: View All Logs for a Service
Check logs for sshd:

sudo journalctl -u sshd
Expected Output:
A log of all sshd-related entries.

Step 2: Filter Logs by Time
View logs from the last hour:

sudo journalctl -u sshd --since "1 hour ago"
Expected Output:
Only recent sshd logs.

Step 3: Follow Logs in Real-Time
Monitor logs live:

sudo journalctl -u sshd -f
Expected Output:
New log entries appear as they are generated (press Ctrl+C to exit).

Conclusion
In this lab, you learned how to:

Check, start, stop, and restart services using systemctl
Enable and disable services at boot
Inspect unit files and dependencies
View logs with journalctl
These skills are essential for managing services in a production environment, particularly in containerized and cloud-native applications.

Additional Practice (Optional)
Create a custom service unit file and manage it with systemctl.
Use systemd-analyze to check system startup performance.
Explore masking a service to prevent it from being started.